USHIFT-4538: MicroShift Gateway api support (#1699)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/microshift/gateway-api-support.md

In order to add more routing features a new project was born in upstream:
[Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/). This is an official kubernetes
project focused on L7 routing (support for L4 is experimental), posed to be the
next standard in ingress, load balancer and service mesh APIs.

This enhancement proposes an implementation to support this new API as an
optional component in MicroShift.

## Motivation
Gateway API support will provide users with another way of expressing their
ingress routing capabilities, also aligned with the way Kubernetes foresees
this functionality.

### User Stories
* As a MicroShift admin, I want to add different Gateway resources to the
  cluster for applications to create routes on them.
* As a MicroShift application developer, I want to add HTTP routes to specific
  Gateways so that I can express routing capabilities using an upstream API.
* As a MicroShift application developer, I want to add GRPC routes to specific
  Gateways so that I can express routing capabilities using an upstream API.

### Goals

> - Full support for core, non-experimental resources, including gateways, HTTP routes and GRPC routes.

Reviewer: Please be very careful about using the term "support" in any enhancement proposals, especially "full support".  This could in the end indicate that the MicroShift team would provide any kind of support, including upstream changes in Istio to "fully support" a customer request.

- Full support for multiple Gateway instances.
- Full support for north/south [use case](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/use-cases/#basic-northsouth-use-case).

> - Lightweight implementation, consuming as little resources as possible.

Author: The product being MicroShift and targeting hardware constrained deployments (potentially) makes this a common requirement, to try to use as few resources as possible. Having said that, the only thing we can do now is to lower resource requests and work on optimizations later on (as it also depends on the traffic being served by gateways, etc.).

### Non-Goals

> - Automatically removing Gateway API from the cluster upon RPM uninstall

Author: Thanks for the resource! Will be watching it to see how it develops. The CRDs from istio are handled by the bundle/operator, but for these we are left only with manual actions.
Also, this non-goal refers to another characteristic in MicroShift, which is the requirement to have manual actions when removing manifests that were installed via RPM (as they may remain in etcd even when the RPM is uninstalled).

> - Automatically removing Gateway API from the cluster upon RPM uninstall

Reviewer: If you're relying on OSSM to install the CRDs, I heard they decided to stop doing this in OSSM 3.0.

> - Automatically removing Gateway API from the cluster upon RPM uninstall

Reviewer 2: Just a heads up that we are discussing a variety of possibilities for how the lifecycle of Gateway API CRDs will be managed in the future. So if nothing else, just try to set up for a pivot if/when new approaches emerge.

- Provide support for experimental resources, such as those listed [here](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/api-overview/#route-resources).
- Support different GatewayClasses with the same controller.

> 

Reviewer: You should state whether service mesh itself is to be a goal/non-goal on MicroShift.  Users will be confused as to why they install OSSM components and cannot use service mesh functionality.

Reviewer: I don't see a change corresponding to this....

## Proposal
As the Gateway API is still in development and MicroShift already provides
means for routing capabilities, this feature should be optional.

As with other optional features there will be an optional RPM with all the
required manifests to be applied upon MicroShift's start. The backing
implementation for Gateway API support will be based on the latest OpenShift

> Service Mesh component, which is an optional operator from OpenShift.

Author: There are 2 sets of CRDs in the background.

Those from Gateway API itself (which is listed in OSSM3 as [DIY](https://github.com/openshift-service-mesh/sail-operator/tree/main/bundle#option-2-kubernetes-gateway-api), plus the link you referenced [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/2655)).

Then the ones from OSSM3 itself. These are extracted from the bundle and applied by MicroShift to the apiserver like OLM would do. This is a day 2 operator in OCP and is also treated as that in MicroShift. Plus, we will be releasing this as dev preview so some incompatiblities/tweaks may be expected at the beginning.

OpenShift Service Mesh (OSSM) is the service mesh operator from OpenShift.
Since version 3 (which is going to be Tech Preview at the time of this writing)
it is based in the [sail operator](https://github.com/openshift-service-mesh/sail-operator/tree/main),
and is released as an optional operator in the Red Hat operators catalog for
OLM. This operator deploys all of Istio's manifests and is capable of handling
Istio control plane deployments, Istio CNIs and other components. Istio has

> first class support for Gateway API resources and is already supported by Red

Reviewer: A definition of "first class support" from Istio for Gateway API resources is needed here.  Again, whenever you use the term "support" you are setting up a big expectation.

Author: Rephrased it.

Hat.

### Workflow Description
**User** is a human user responsible for setting up and managing Edge Devices.
**Application** is user's workload that intends to use routing capabilities.

#### Installation and usage on RHEL For Edge (ostree)
> In this workflow, it doesn't matter if the device is already running R4E with existing MicroShift cluster.
> Deployment of new commit requires reboot which will force recreation of the Pod networking after adding Multus.

1. User gathers all information about the networking environment of the edge device.
1. User prepares ostree commit that contains:
   - MicroShift RPMs.

>    - Gateway API for MicroShift RPM.

Reviewer 3: Will "Gateway API for MicroShift" RPM be dependent on microshift-multus RPM?

Author: This was a typo.

>    - Gateway CRs

Reviewer: Do you mean Gateway API CRs?

Author: Yes, rephrased it.

   - Application using mentioned Gateway CRs.
1. User deploys the ostree commit onto the edge device.
1. Edge device boots:
1. (optional) Init procedures are configuring OS and networks.
1. MicroShift starts.
1. MicroShift applies Gateway API manifests.

> 1. Istio controller becomes available.

Reviewer: What do you mean by Istio controller?  The sailoperator?

Author: No, the istiod instance once you create an `Istio` resource. I added some more details at the end of the proposal section.

> 1. MicroShift applies Application's manifests that may include Gateways and routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. MicroShift applies Application's manifests that may include Gateway API Gateways, HTTPRoutes, and/or GRPCRoutes.
```

Author: Done

##### Adding to existing MicroShift cluster (or before first start)
1. MicroShift already runs on the device. (This step may not be true if its before first start)
1. User installs `microshift-gateway-api` RPM
1. User restarts MicroShift service.
1. MicroShift starts and deploys all Gateway API resources from `manifests.d`.
1. Istio controller becomes available.
1. User creates Gateway and routes (HTTP or GRPC) CRs
1. When Gateway pods are created, routes are picked up and configured by the controller which is already running.
1. Application's pods are running, they are reachable through the routes in the Gateway.

### API Extensions
Most of the manifests are CRDs, and users are left only with creating Gateway,
HTTPRoute and GRPCRoute resources. These are explained in the use cases in the
[documentation](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/use-cases/#basic-northsouth-use-case).

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes
Not applicable

#### Standalone Clusters
Not applicable

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift
Enhancement is solely intended for MicroShift.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]
N/A

#### Manifests

> Gateway API is just a set a CustomResourceDefinitions. In order to support it

Reviewer: Well, there is quite a bit of work you skip over there.  Gateway API implementations must abide by the API contract (CRDS, CEL, and standards) and are said to be conformant when they pass and publish the Gateway API conformance tests.

Author: As this section is talking about manifests only I rephrased it to make the intent more clear.

> we need to install OSSM, which brings Istio with it and more CRDs. Aside from

Reviewer: Istio has Envoy Proxy and discovery components.

Author: Added a note.

  upon.
- An Istio manifest to configure the service mesh control plane.
- A greenboot script to ensure OSSM is ready.

### Risks and Mitigations
The risks for this feature are two-fold: technical and non-technical.

On the technical side we have a dependency between CRDs and CRs when
installing. When a CRD has not yet been established it means the apiserver is
not able to serve it yet. Since there are CRs in the same RPM that need CRDs
to be available this could become a race condition when installing. The
mitigation would be to turn the RPM into a controller with proper mechanisms
to wait and sync resources. An RPM was chosen because of the dev preview nature
of the feature, as it simplifies things on MicroShift.

On the non-technical side, this feature is born as Dev Preview to wait on
customer feedback and adoption. This has no mitigation other than help out
potential users of the feature

### Drawbacks
The inclusion of OpenShift Service Mesh brings extra resource usage. As this is
released as dev preview, users need to opt into it. Additional memory should be
planned when enabling this feature, as OSSM components and the gateways

> themselves consume additional resources.

Reviewer: A brief survey of the additional resources here would be helpful.

## Open Questions [optional]
N/A

## Test Plan
Gateway API support for MicroShift will be tested using existing test
harness. A new suite will be created with a simple test for the overall setup
with an HTTP route. Another test will ensure compatibility with the current
OpenShift router deployment.

## Graduation Criteria
Gateway API for MicroShift is targeted to be Dev Preview on MicroShift 4.18.

> At the time of this writing OSSM is in Tech Preview state, expected to graduate

Reviewer: TP2 will follow TP1 before GA.

same time.

The bulk of manifests are CRDs which have their own versioning, so the
upgrade/downgrade strategy relies on the components using them. Extracting the
OSSM manifests from the bundle guarantees that Istio will be compatible with
them.

For Gateway and HTTPRoute/GRPCRoute resources, manual action may be needed but
this is the application's responsibility.

## Version Skew Strategy
Building Gateway API and MicroShift RPMs from the same spec file means both
should be updated together which means there should not be any version skew
between them.

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions
N/A

## Support Procedures
In order to debug error situations with Gateway API and OSSM, Gateways and
routes need to be inspected.

The first thing to check is the gatewayclass status, it needs to be accepted
and handled by the istio controller, as shown in the status:
```
$ oc get gatewayclass openshift-gateway-api -o yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: GatewayClass
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2024-10-14T07:44:20Z"
  generation: 1
  name: openshift-gateway-api
  resourceVersion: "1060"
  uid: 0707b37e-c3c6-4b8a-a344-24545d8b8351
spec:

>   controllerName: openshift.io/gateway-controller

Reviewer: This is the [controllerName when you're using Cluster Ingress](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/master/pkg/operator/controller/gatewayclass/controller.go#L31).  Does this work if Cluster Ingress is not installed on MicroShift?  It probably shouldn't.

Author: Yes, this is only a name for the GatewayClass that needs to be configured in Istio Pilot env var [PILOT_GATEWAY_API_CONTROLLER_NAME](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/commands/pilot-discovery/) and [Gateway](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1.GatewaySpec) CRs must use too.
Cluster ingress operator uses this to configure OSSM2 as well. Since cluster ingress operator is not present in MicroShift and in order to be as close to OCP as possible we chose the same name.

status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-10-14T07:44:30Z"
    message: Handled by Istio controller
    observedGeneration: 1
    reason: Accepted
    status: "True"
    type: Accepted
```

If we have a Gateway `demo-gateway` using the above GatewayClass we should see it has been accepted and programmed by the gateway class:
```
$ oc get gateway -n openshift-ingress demo-gateway -o yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  annotations:
    gateway.istio.io/controller-version: "5"
  creationTimestamp: "2024-10-14T07:48:16Z"
  generation: 1
  name: demo-gateway

>   namespace: openshift-ingress

Reviewer: The `namespace` you use will be very important in terms of access between Gateways/Routes/Services, but should not be `openshift-ingress`.

Author: Updated to `openshift-gateway-api`
